Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it
is the start of another three-part
mini-series, this time on the
making of modern Saudi Arabia.
In part one, today’s episode, we’ll
be talking about the rise of the
man behind it, Mohammed Bin Salman,
or MBS, as he is often known.
In part two, we’ll turn to one of the most
ambitious, almost science-fiction-like
projects of the 21st century: a planned
desert city of the future, 500 metres
high and 170 kilometres long, called NEOM.
And in part three, we are going to
look at a somewhat darker chapter:
the blood-curdling murder of the
dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi.
OK then, let's not waste a
minute and get right into it.
If you went up to a random person on the
streets of Britain and asked them to name
as many British princes and princesses
as possible, my guess is that they might
be able to name a good chunk of them.
If you stumbled across someone
who was a serious royal watcher,
perhaps they could name all 17.
In Saudi Arabia, however, I am
pretty confident that nobody, not
even the king, would be able to
name every Saudi prince or princess.
And even if they could, it would
take them several hours to list them.
There is no public list, but it’s
estimated that there are anywhere
between 5,000 and 15,000 princes
and princesses in Saudi Arabia.
Thousands of people with some claim
back to the country’s founder, Abdulaziz
bin Abdul Rahman Al Saud, or Ibn Saud
as he’s commonly called in the west.
He had almost 100 children, with
a mixture of official wives and
concubines, and most of them went on
to have large families of their own,
with each descendant having the right
to call themself a prince or princess.
Now, the history of Saudi Arabia, even
the relatively short history of the modern
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, is as fascinating
as it is complicated, and we don’t have
the time to go into it in detail today.
But for the purposes of our story, the
thing to underline is firstly the size
of the Saudi royal family, and secondly
how succession works, how the title of
king passes from one person to the next.
In a typical monarchy — like Britain,
Spain, or the Netherlands — the crown
passes downwards, from ruling male
to the eldest next eligible male.
From father to eldest son.
And if that son has died,
then to the grandson.
It follows a straight vertical
line down the male line of the
family, with some more forward
thinking monarchies now allowing
daughters to be considered as well.
But Saudi Arabia was very different.
When Ibn Saud died in 1953, he didn’t
have one eligible son; he had almost 45
acknowledged sons, with the oldest in
his 50s, and the youngest still a boy.
This created both a
problem and an opportunity.
The problem was that many of these
sons were grown, adult men, with
military experience, political
authority, and powerful backers.
Choosing just one of those sons, or
one of their children, would have
meant favouring one branch of this
enormous family over all the others.
And with hundreds of princes and
thousands of descendants, that
could have led to an immediate, and
possibly violent, power struggle.
But the flip side of this was that
there was an almost 50 year age gap
between the oldest and the youngest son.
Saudi Arabia could adopt a
different system that kept
things in the same generation.
Instead of moving vertically — father
→ son → grandson — the throne could
move horizontally, from brother to
brother, staying within the founder’s
generation for as long as possible.
So when Ibn Saud died in 1953, the crown
passed not to one of his sons’ children,
but to one of his adult sons: King Saud.
When King Saud was removed from power,
the crown passed to yet another brother.
And then another.
For decades, power moved horizontally
across a single generation—between
the dozens of sons of Ibn Saud.
This was a deliberate decision.
It kept the peace between
branches of the family.
It rewarded seniority,
experience, and age.
And, above all, it preserved
consensus among a very large
pool of powerful princes.
But thwas also somethinging
of a ticking time bomb.
As time went on, and the founding
generation began to age, the number of
potential successors grew dramatically.
Each of those sons had children.
Those sons had children.
And all of them had opinions,
ambitions, and networks of influence.
The House of Saud was
no longer a family tree.
It was more like a dense, thick forest.
And by the early 2000s, Saudi Arabia
had reached a moment of quiet tension.
Everyone knew the horizontal model
of succession couldn’t last forever.
Eventually, the crown would have to
pass down to the next generation.
And the next generation was
huge—dozens upon dozens of princes
who had grown up with extraordinary
wealth, political connections,
and varying degrees of competence.
Some were talented.
Some were not.
Some wanted reform.
Others wanted stability.
And many had spent their entire lives
preparing for the possibility—just
the slightest of possibilities—that
they might one day rule.
For the first time since the kingdom’s
foundation, the question hanging in the
air was not just who would be king next,
but how that choice would even be made.
And it was into this world—a world of
vast wealth, complicated family politics,
and an increasingly urgent need for a
younger, more dynamic leadership—that
we find Mohammed bin Salman, MBS.
He wasn’t in the obvious
line of succession.
He wasn’t the eldest
son of the eldest son.
In fact, for much of his early
life, he barely registered on the
list of potential future kings.
He was born in 1985, the sixth
child of Salman bin Abdulaziz,
a then 50-year-old senior prince
who had served for decades as the
governor of Riyadh, the capital city.
His father was respected, serious,
disciplined — a man with a
reputation for hard work and order.
But his father was only one of the
almost 50 sons of Ibn Saud, and not at
the very top of the succession list.
It’s not clear exactly what
number son he was, but it’s
believed he was around number 25.
So MBS, as the sixth son of a prince not
expected to get anywhere near the throne,
didn’t grow up expecting to be king.
He wasn’t educated abroad,
like many of his royal cousins.
He didn’t spend his teenage years
floating between luxury compounds
in Europe or the United States.
Instead, he stayed in Saudi
Arabia, went to local schools,
and lived a comparatively grounded
life — well, grounded by the
standards of a Saudi prince.
According to a recent biography, as a
teenager he showed little ambition or
interest in climbing the royal ladder.
He preferred video games and
McDonald’s to business and politics.
Whether something changed, or
he was silently plotting from a
very young age, we do not know.
But sometime in his late teens, slowly
but surely, he started to make his move.
He cultivated connections with
businessmen, security officials, and
younger members of the royal family.
He developed a reputation for being the
prince who got things done, who followed
up, who didn’t disappear into luxury or
lose himself in excess, something of a
rare trait for a young, Saudi prince.
He developed a reputation for
being serious, determined,
and surprisingly focused.
He studied law at King Saud University,
graduating near the top of his class,
and then began working informally
as an adviser — first to his
father, then to other senior royals.
These weren’t glamorous roles.
They were administrative,
bureaucratic, and sometimes tedious.
But they were important.
They gave him insight into
how decisions were made.
Who held power.
Who merely appeared to hold power.
And where the weaknesses
in the old system lay.
And here’s an important detail.
Saudi Arabia is an absolute
monarchy; it doesn’t run on
political parties and elections.
It runs on networks, tribal networks,
business networks, security networks,
and all this underpinned by the sprawling
network of the royal family itself.
Knowing the right people — and being
trusted by them — is one of the most
powerful currencies in the country.
MBS understood this instinctively.
He also believed that his
country needed to change.
Around half the country
is under the age of 30.
Yet it was stuck in the past: ruled by
men in their 70s and 80s, and beholden to
conservative religious authorities that
were given de facto power in the 1980s.
Criminals were still publicly
beheaded, women needed male guardian
permission for many aspects of life,
and they weren’t allowed to drive.
Mohammed knew that something had to change
for the country to modernise, but he must
have thought that he would never have
got the chance to have any say in it.
This all changed in 2012, when his father,
Salman, was appointed Crown Prince, in
other words, next in line to the throne.
And the then king, Abdullah, was rapidly
approaching his 90th birthday, so this
really was an imminent succession plan.
Suddenly, MBS was one of the
sons of the next King, and he
began to position himself right
at the heart of the royal court.
Sure enough, in January, 2015,
King Abdullah died, and the crown
passed to Salman, MBS’s father.
Now, Salman had other sons, but he made it
pretty clear that MBS was his favourite.
He immediately accelerated his son’s
career, handing him two truly monumental
positions that put him in control
of both the money and the military:
First, MBS was named Minister of Defence.
At just 29 years old, he became
the youngest defence minister
in the world, and within months,
he launched a controversial
military intervention in Yemen.
Second, and perhaps more importantly, he
was appointed Chief of the Royal Court.
This made him the King’s
official gatekeeper, controlling
all access to the monarch.
If anyone in the sprawling royal family
or the government wanted to speak to
King Salman, they had to go through MBS.
With this authority, he began
his campaign to centralise power.
He started pushing the ambitious economic
and social reform plan known as Vision
2030—a plan to remake Saudi society and
end the kingdom's dependency on oil.
By promoting this radical vision, he
positioned himself as the moderniser
and the champion of Saudi youth,
earning huge popular support.
But, and it is a big but, he still
wasn’t crown prince; he wasn’t
technically in line to the throne.
This title went to an older cousin,
Mohammed Bin Nayef, or MBN for short.
Now, MBN was a serious figure.
He was the Interior Minister, a
known counter-terrorism expert, and a
favoured long-time partner of Western
intelligence agencies, including the CIA.
He was the established choice to
be the next king under the old
system, a safe pair of hands.
But in June 2017, King Salman
made a shocking announcement.
MBN was going to be removed
from all duties, and MBS would
replace him as Crown Prince.
Power was officially moving
vertically—from father to son—shattering
the seven-decade-old tradition of
horizontal, brother-to-brother succession.
The transition was not exactly peaceful.
Sources later revealed MBN was summoned
to a royal palace late one night, held
against his will, and pressured for hours
to sign documents resigning his position.
To show a facade of continuity, Saudi
state television broadcast a clip of
the newly appointed MBS kneeling to
kiss the hand of the deposed heir, MBN.
But the message was clear:
the consensus era was over.
MBS had engineered a quiet,
behind-the-scenes coup,
consolidating power in a manner
unseen since the kingdom's founding.
And this was only the beginning.
The next step in securing his
absolute dominance was even more
shocking: a royal purge that turned
one of the capital's most luxurious
hotels into a gilded prison.
On the night of November 4th,
2017, something extraordinary
happened in Riyadh.
Without warning, dozens of the
most powerful people in Saudi
Arabia—princes, ministers,
billionaires—received sudden orders
to report to the Ritz-Carlton hotel.
Some thought they were being
invited to an urgent meeting.
Others believed they were being
summoned for an audience with the King.
Instead, they walked into what
was effectively the world’s
most luxurious detention centre.
The Ritz-Carlton was shut to the public.
Its phone lines were cut.
Security forces surrounded the grounds.
And inside, some of the richest and
most influential men in the entire
Middle East were told they were
under investigation for corruption.
Among those detained was Prince
Alwaleed bin Talal, the so-called
Warren Buffet of Arabia, one of the
most recognisable Saudi billionaires,
a man with major shareholdings in
big American technology companies.
There were former ministers, media
tycoons, heads of major companies, and
even senior members of the military.
In total, around 380 people were
rounded up over the course of the purge.
They were held not in cells, but in
the ballroom and bedrooms of the Ritz,
sleeping under gold chandeliers and
ordering room service under armed guard.
Officially, this was an
anti-corruption campaign.
Billions of dollars had been siphoned
off through decades of patronage,
contracts, and opaque deals, and
the government–or rather, MBS–said
it was time to clean up the system.
But almost nobody believed
the official explanation.
This wasn’t simply about corruption.
It was about power.
By arresting some of the kingdom’s
wealthiest and most connected figures,
MBS was doing something unprecedented:
He was removing every rival
who could challenge him.
And it worked.
Within a few months, detainees agreed
to hand over assets, property, or
cash in exchange for their freedom.
The Saudi state claimed to have recovered
over 100 billion dollars’ worth of assets.
But more importantly, Mohammed
bin Salman emerged as the
undisputed centre of authority.
The message was unmistakable.
If he could detain princes and
billionaires at will, there
was nobody he couldn’t touch.
And while the purge at the Ritz-Carlton
made headlines around the world, inside
Saudi Arabia it did something else:
It made MBS wildly popular
among young Saudis.
To many ordinary people, the old elite
had lived above the law for decades.
Suddenly, a young prince was taking them
on—publicly, decisively, dramatically.
It felt like a revolution, but
a revolution led from the top.
But popularity at home
was only half the battle.
MBS knew that to truly transform Saudi
Arabia, he needed to change how the
rest of the world saw his country.
And that meant tackling the kingdom's
greatest vulnerability: oil.
For decades, Saudi Arabia had
been defined by a single resource.
Oil paid for everything—the
palaces, the welfare state, the
military, the sprawling bureaucracy.
But oil prices were volatile, and MBS
could see that the world was slowly
turning toward renewable energy.
He wanted to wean the country off its
reliance on oil before it was too late.
He wanted to reshape the country’s
entire economy, its international
relationships, and—perhaps most
ambitiously—its global image.
He wanted Silicon Valley, Wall Street,
and the world to see Saudi Arabia not as
an oil state stuck in the past… but as
the next great frontier for innovation.
He created a huge sovereign wealth
fund, committing tens of billions of
dollars to be invested in technology
startups, pouring money into companies
like Uber, Slack, WeWork, and DoorDash.
In just a matter of a few years,
Saudi Arabia wasn’t just buying
football teams or luxury hotels.
It was sitting right at the table
of global tech’s biggest bets.
And it didn’t stop there.
MBS struck personal relationships
with world leaders, including Donald
Trump, who visited Riyadh in 2017 on
his first foreign trip as president.
Trump and his administration warmly
embraced the young crown prince,
announcing major arms deals, praising
his reforms, and offering the kind
of diplomatic support MBS needed
as he consolidated power at home.
For the first time ever, it seemed as
though Saudi Arabia was on the cusp of
reinventing itself entirely—modernising
socially, diversifying economically, and
becoming a hub for futuristic projects.
And perhaps the boldest of all these
projects was one we’ll be talking about
in part two of this mini-series: a new
city in the desert, 170 kilometres long,
built in a straight line, powered entirely
by clean energy, and designed as a kind
of techno-utopia for the 21st century.
A place called NEOM.
But alongside this glossy vision
of the future, there was a
much darker side to MBS’s rule.
Because while foreign investors
were flying in, and global leaders
were shaking hands, opponents of
the government—activists, critics,
journalists—they were increasingly being
targeted inside Saudi Arabia and abroad.
Women’s rights campaigners were arrested.
Rival princes who had not been
caught up in the Ritz-Carlton purge
suddenly found themselves silenced.
Even tweets, at times, became
grounds for imprisonment.
And in 2018, the world witnessed
something so shocking, so brutal,
that it permanently changed the
international perception of Mohammed
bin Salman: the gruesome murder of
the journalist Jamal Khashoggi inside
the Saudi consulate in Istanbul.
Now, we’ll be going into this in much
more detail in part three, but in short,
this well-known Saudi journalist went
into the consulate, was murdered and
then chopped to pieces with a bone saw.
Although this was first denied by Saudi
authorities, the official policy line is
that it was carried out by rogue state
actors, without the knowledge of MBS.
And for a brief period after this
shocking discovery, it looked like it
would be hard for MBS to come back.
Businessmen who had once been happy
to be photographed beside him declined
meetings, investors pulled out of
the country, and newspaper columns
were filled with damning reports.
But time and money were on his side.
And, sure enough, investors,
politicians, and celebrities didn’t
take too long to change their tune.
Saudi Arabia’s enormous wealth,
its strategic importance, and its
ambitious plans for the future proved
too attractive for many to ignore.
Global CEOs quietly flew back to Riyadh.
Tech investors resumed their courtship.
Hollywood stars returned
for glitzy events.
And governments—publicly or
privately—re-engaged with the kingdom.
Within 18 months, MBS was hosting
the G20 summit in Riyadh, where world
leaders—including those who'd publicly
condemned him—stood side by side with
the crown prince for official photos.
And that brings us to today.
As of the time of recording this episode,
his father, the 90-year-old King Salman,
is still nominally on the throne.
Today, Mohammed bin Salman is not
just the Crown Prince; he is the
de facto ruler of Saudi Arabia.
When he becomes king, and perhaps he
already will be by the time you listen
to this, it will merely be a formality.
He already oversees everything from
oil strategy to social reforms, from
foreign policy to football clubs.
He has relaxed some long-standing
restrictions—women can now drive, cinemas
have reopened, concerts are allowed,
and the infamous secret police have
been stripped of much of their power.
For young Saudis who grew up unable to
go to a cinema, or lived in fear of being
stopped on the street by the religious
police, these changes felt revolutionary.
Yet the darker sides of his rule remain
impossible to ignore: the silencing of
critics, the imprisonment of activists,
the ongoing humanitarian crisis in
Yemen, and the unresolved questions
around the murder of Jamal Khashoggi.
To some, MBS is a visionary moderniser.
To others, a ruthless authoritarian.
To many, he is both.
He is only 40 years old, and in
all likelihood will look forward
to the best part of 50 years
on the throne of Saudi Arabia.
What is certain is that he
is someone you cannot ignore.
OK, then, that is it for today's
episode on Mohammed Bin Salman.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought of this episode.
We have lots of listeners from Saudi
Arabia, so let me know what you think?
How has MBS changed the country, and
what hopes do you have for the future?
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
And as a final reminder, this is
part one of a three-part mini-series.
Next up, in part two, we’ll be looking at
the astronomically ambitious and expensive
project of NEOM, and in part three it’ll
be the gruesome murder of Jamal Khashoggi.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.